doc/website/blog: TiDB announcement (#2396)
ent/ent: doc/website/blog/2022-03-15-announcing-preview-support-for-tidb.md

---
title: Announcing preview support for TiDB
author: Amit Shani
authorURL: "https://github.com/hedwigz"
authorImageURL: "https://avatars.githubusercontent.com/u/8277210?v=4"
authorTwitter: itsamitush
---

We [previously announced](2022-01-20-announcing-new-migration-engine.md) the new migration engine - `Atlas`.
With `Atlas`'s new design, it has become easier than ever to add support for new databases in Ent.
Today, I am happy to announce that preview support for [TiDB](https://en.pingcap.com/tidb/) is now available, using the latest version of Ent with `Atlas` enabled.  

> Ent is a powerful Entity framework that helps developers build large applications in a breeze. Just by defining the data model of your application, Ent provides you the tools to:
> 1. Generate feature rich, performant and clean:
> 	* [GraphQL server](https://entgo.io/docs/tutorial-todo-gql).
> 	* [REST server](2022-02-15-generate-rest-crud-with-ent-and-ogen.md).
> 	* [GRPC server](https://entgo.io/docs/grpc-intro).
> 1. [Traverse](https://entgo.io/docs/traversals) your data graph.
> 1. Perform safe DB [migrations](https://entgo.io/blog/2022/03/14/announcing-versioned-migrations).
>   
> When your application grows and your database loads increase as a result, scaling your database becomes essential. This is where [NewSQL](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/NewSQL) databases come in.
> 
> ### TiDB
> [TiDB](https://en.pingcap.com/tidb/) is an [open-source](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb) NewSQL database. It provides many features that traditional databases don't, such as:
> 1. MySQL compatibility
> 2. Horizontal scaling
> 3. Real-Time HTAP
> 4. Pre-packed monitoring w/ Prometheus+Grafana
>   
> To read more about it, check out the official [TiDB Introduction](https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/stable).
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Ent is an Entity framework that makes developing build large applications a breeze. Ent was [open-sourced in late 
2019](https://entgo.io/blog/2019/10/03/introducing-ent) and officially [joined the Linux Foundation]
(https://entgo.io/blog/2021/09/01/ent-joins-the-linux-foundation) last September. By defining the data model of your application, Ent provides you the tools to:

1. Generate a type-safe, explicit API for accessing your database.
2. Automatically generate feature-rich, performant, and clean: 
  * [GraphQL server](https://entgo.io/docs/tutorial-todo-gql).
  * [REST server](2022-02-15-generate-rest-crud-with-ent-and-ogen.md).
  * [gRPC server](https://entgo.io/docs/grpc-intro).
3. [Traverse](https://entgo.io/docs/traversals) your data using graph semantics.
4. Perform safe DB [migrations](https://entgo.io/blog/2022/03/14/announcing-versioned-migrations).
  
Ent can be used to access data in many types of databases, both Graph-oriented and relational.  Most commonly, users have been using standard open-source relational databases such as MySQL, MariaDB, and PostgreSQL.  As teams building Ent-based applications become more successful and need to deal with larger scales, these single-node databases often become the bottleneck for scaling out. For this reason, many members of the Ent community have requested support [NewSQL](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/NewSQL) databases such as TiDB.

### TiDB
[TiDB](https://en.pingcap.com/tidb/) is an [open-source](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb) NewSQL database. It provides many features that traditional databases don't, such as:
1. Horizontal scaling - for many years software architects needed to choose between the familiarity and guarantees that relational databases provide and the scaling-out capability of _NoSQL_ databases (such as MongoDB or Cassandra). TiDB supports horizontal scaling while maintaining good compatibility with MySQL features. 
2. HTAP (Hybrid transactional/analytical processing) - In addition, databases are traditionally divided into analytical (OLAP) and transactional (OLTP) databases. TiDB breaks this dichotomy by enabling both analytics and transactional workloads on the same database. 
3. Pre-packed monitoring w/ Prometheus+Grafana - TiDB is built on Cloud-native paradigms from the ground up, and natively supports the standard CNCF observability stack. 
  
To read more about it, check out the official [TiDB Introduction](https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/stable).

```

---
title: Announcing preview support for TiDB
author: Amit Shani
authorURL: "https://github.com/hedwigz"
authorImageURL: "https://avatars.githubusercontent.com/u/8277210?v=4"
authorTwitter: itsamitush
---

We [previously announced](https://entgo.io/blog/2022/01/20/announcing-new-migration-engine) the new migration engine - `Atlas`.

> With `Atlas`'s new design, it became easier than ever to add support for new databases for Ent.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
With `Atlas`'s new design, it has become easier than ever to add support for new databases in Ent.
```

Today, I am happy to announce that preview support for [TiDB](https://en.pingcap.com/tidb/) is now available, using the latest version of Ent with `Atlas` enabled.  

### TiDB and NewSQL
[TiDB](https://en.pingcap.com/tidb/) is an [open-source](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb) [NewSQL](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/NewSQL) database. It provides many features that traditional databases don't, such as:
1. MySQL compatibility
2. Horizontal scaling
3. Real-Time HTAP
4. Pre-packed monitoring w/ Prometheus+Grafana
  
To read more about it, check out the official [TiDB Introduction](https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/stable).

### Hello World with TiDB

> For a quick "Hello World" application with Ent+TiDB, follow the following steps:  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For a quick "Hello World" application with Ent+TiDB, follow these steps:  
```

1. Spin up a local TiDB server by using Docker:
 ```shell
 docker run -p 4000:4000 pingcap/tidb
 ```

>  You should now have a running instance of TiDB listening on port 4000.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
 Now you should have a running instance of TiDB listening on port 4000.
```

2. Clone the example [`hello world` repository](https://github.com/hedwigz/tidb-hello-world):
 ```shell
 git clone https://github.com/hedwigz/tidb-hello-world.git
 ```
 In this example repository we defined a simple schema `User`:
 ```go title="ent/schema/user.go"
 func (User) Fields() []ent.Field {
 	  return []ent.Field{
  		field.Time("created_at").
	  		Default(time.Now),
		  field.String("name"),
		  field.Int("age"),
	  }
 }
 ```

>  we then connected Ent with TiDB:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
 Then, we connected Ent with TiDB:
```

 ```go title="main.go"
 client, err := ent.Open("mysql", "root@tcp(localhost:4000)/test?parseTime=true")
 if err != nil {
 	log.Fatalf("failed opening connection to sqlite: %v", err)
 }
 defer client.Close()
 // Run the auto migration tool, with Atlas.
 if err := client.Schema.Create(context.Background(), schema.WithAtlas(true)); err != nil {
 	log.Fatalf("failed printing schema changes: %v", err)
 }
	```
 Note that in line `1` we connect to the TiDB server using a `mysql` dialect. This is possible due to the fact that TiDB is [MySQL compatible](https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/stable/mysql-compatibility), and it does not require any special driver.  

>  Having said that, there are some differences between TiDB and MySQL, especially around things relevant to schema migrations, such as information schema inspection and migration planning. For this reason, `Atlas` automatically detects if it is connected to `TiDB` and handles that accordingly.  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
 Having said that, there are some differences between TiDB and MySQL, especially when pertaining to schema migrations, such as information schema inspection and migration planning. For this reason, `Atlas` automatically detects if it is connected to `TiDB` and handles the migration accordingly.  
```

>  In addition to that, note that in line `7` we used `schema.WithAtlas(true)`, which flags Ent to use `Atlas` as its 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
 In addition, note that in line `7` we used `schema.WithAtlas(true)`, which flags Ent to use `Atlas` as its 
```

 migration engine.  
   

>  Finally, we create a user and save that record to TiDB to later be queried and printed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
 Finally, we create a user and save the record to TiDB to later be queried and printed.
```

 ```go title="main.go"
 client.User.Create().
		SetAge(30).
		SetName("hedwigz").
		SaveX(context.Background())
 user := client.User.Query().FirstX(context.Background())
 fmt.Printf("the user: %s is %d years old\n", user.Name, user.Age)
 ```
 3. Run the example program:
 ```go
 $ go run main.go
 the user: hedwigz is 30 years old
 ```

Woohoo! In this quick walk-through we managed to:
* Spin up a local instance of TiDB.
* Connect Ent with TiDB.
* Migrate our Ent schema with Atlas.

> * Insert and Query from TiDB using Ent.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Insert and query from TiDB using Ent.
```

### Preview support
The integration of Atlas with TiDB is well tested with TiDB version `v5.4.0` (currently, latest) and we will extend that in the future.

> If you're using other versions of TiDB or having troubles, don't hesitate to [file an issue](https://github.com/ariga/atlas/issues) or join our [Discord channel](https://discord.gg/zZ6sWVg6NT).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you're using other versions of TiDB or looking for help, don't hesitate to [file an issue](https://github.com/ariga/atlas/issues) or join our [Discord channel](https://discord.gg/zZ6sWVg6NT).
```

3. **Pre-packed monitoring** w/ Prometheus+Grafana - TiDB is built on Cloud-native paradigms from the ground up, and natively supports the standard CNCF observability stack. 
  
To read more about it, check out the official [TiDB Introduction](https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/stable).

### Hello World with TiDB

For a quick "Hello World" application with Ent+TiDB, follow these steps:  
1. Spin up a local TiDB server by using Docker:
 ```shell
 docker run -p 4000:4000 pingcap/tidb
 ```
 Now you should have a running instance of TiDB listening on port 4000.

2. Clone the example [`hello world` repository](https://github.com/hedwigz/tidb-hello-world):
 ```shell
 git clone https://github.com/hedwigz/tidb-hello-world.git
 ```
 In this example repository we defined a simple schema `User`:
 ```go title="ent/schema/user.go"
 func (User) Fields() []ent.Field {
 	  return []ent.Field{
  		field.Time("created_at").
	  		Default(time.Now),
		  field.String("name"),
		  field.Int("age"),
	  }
 }
 ```
 Then, we connected Ent with TiDB:
 ```go title="main.go"
 client, err := ent.Open("mysql", "root@tcp(localhost:4000)/test?parseTime=true")
 if err != nil {

>  	log.Fatalf("failed opening connection to sqlite: %v", err)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
 	log.Fatalf("failed opening connection to tidb: %v", err)
```
